# DOCUMENTATION for libsocket++

## Introduction and General Information for Devs

libsocket++ is an object-oriented wrapper around libsocket. To avoid writing the code twice
and maintain it twice, libsocket++ calls the functions from libsocket.

### Practical Usage

libsocket++ uses the namespace `libsocket`, so you either have to construct the classes like this:

	libsocket::inet_stream sock;

or use some things or the whole namespace:

	using namespace libsocket;

(for the internet TCP client socket class)

	using libsocket::inet_stream;

### Header file

The header files are located in headers/; you just have to include the header file of the class(es) you're using. It will
include all header files needed for it to work. E.g.: If you use `inet_stream`, you just include `inetclientstream.hpp`, but you
don't have to include `inetbase.hpp`, `socket.hpp`, `exception.hpp` and so on.

## Usage in Your Application
### Dynamic

Build and install the library as described in the README file.

### Static

If you want to build a stand-alone binary without the need to link against the libsocket shared object, you may
compile libsocket into your application (the license permits this), but there are some pitfalls.

- libsocket++ is only an object-oriented wrapper around libsocket; you always have to compile C/libinetsocket.c or link against
  libsocket.so.
- If you compile the C files with a C compiler and the C++ files with a C++ compiler, you **have to set the flag
-DMIXED when invoking of the C++ compiler!** This macro enables *extern "C" { ... }* statements in the C headers; if you
don't enable MIXED, the linker will not find the C functions.

To reduce the size of the executables, it is recommended to compile your code only with that library files which are
actually necessary. For example, if you have a program which serves as client for a UDP based application:

	$ g++ -o client client.cpp /path/to/libsocket/C/libinetsocket.c /path/to/libsocket/C++/{socket,inetbase,inetdgram,inetclientdgram}.cpp

## Class Hierarchy and names

The class hierarchy is quite complex. You may take a look at it by viewing `classes.svg` in this directory or the
Doxygen inheritance diagrams for the `socket` class.

The classes have (in general) names made of three components: `<domain>_<protocol>_<role>`: E.g. `unix_stream_server` or `inet_dgram_client`.
However, there's one exception: The TCP internet client class is called `inet_stream`.

The files use another schema: `<domain><role><protocol>.(c|h)pp`, e.g. `inetclientstream.cpp` for the class `inet_stream_client`.

Among this classes, there are many other classes. In the diagram, this classes are the white boxes. It makes no sense to instantiate
objects from this classes although it's possible (they aren't abstract).

## Exception Handling
Defined in `exception.cpp`, has to be included from `exception.hpp`

	struct socket_exception
	{
		int err; // errno at throw time (usually set by a crashing syscall in the underlying libsocket)
		std::string mesg; // Error message from libsocket++

		socket_exception(std::string,int,std::string);
	};

A `socket_exception` object is thrown in case of error. Almost every function may raise an exception containing a std::string looking like this:

	../C++/inetclientstream.cpp:167: <<(std::string) output: Socket not connected!
				(1)             (2)       (3)                       (4)

It contains information about the file (1), the line (2), the function throwing the exception (3) and information about
the cause for the exception (4) - here, a program tried to write to a TCP connection which did not exist at that time.

Example for error handling:

	try {
		sock << "test";
	} catch (libsocket::socket_exception exc)
	{
		std::cerr << exc.mesg << " errno code: " << exc.err;
	}

Machine-readable information about errors are placed in the `errno` variable. Possible values are described in the
man pages of the underlying system calls.

# libinetsocket++

libinetsocket++ is the wrapper around libinetsocket.

## `inet_stream` Class: Internet TCP Client Stream Sockets
Declared in `inetclientstream.hpp`, defined in `inetclientstream.cpp`

Please note that the name is _not_ `inet_stream_client`!

	1: inet_stream(void);
	2: inet_stream(const char* host, const char* port, int proto_osi3, int flags=0);
	3: inet_stream(const std::string& dsthost, const std::string& dstport, int proto_osi3, int flags=0);

1: Only initializes the most important things. The socket remains unconnected and _must_ be connected before use using `connect()`.

2,3: The constructor initializes the socket and connects it with the given host:

- `host`: Destination host; if you have the host as `std::string`, use its routine `std::string::c_str()` to get
the C string
- `port`: Destination port (TCP, of course); conversion from string like above.
- `proto_osi3`: `LIBSOCKET_IPv4`, `LIBSOCKET_IPv6` or `LIBSOCKET_BOTH` (`LIBSOCKET_BOTH` lets the library choose (decision based on DNS response; cpp macros; defined in header file `inetbase.hpp`)
- `flags`: Default 0, can be `SOCK_NONBLOCK` or `SOCK_CLOEXEC` (see: `socket(2)`; it must be 0 on other platforms than Linux to avoid errors)

### `connect()`
Declared in `inetclientstream.hpp`, defined in `inetclientstream.cpp`

	void connect(const char* host, const char* port, int proto_osi3, int flags=0);
	void connect(const string& dsthost, const string& dstport, int proto_osi3, int flags);

Connects the socket. Throws an exception if the socket is already connected. May be called after a `destroy()` call to re-connect the socket.

- `host`: Destination host; if you have the host as `std::string`, use its routine `std::string::c_str()` to get
the C string
- `port`: Destination port (TCP, of course); conversion from string like above.
- `proto_osi3`: `LIBSOCKET_IPv4` or `LIBSOCKET_IPv6` (pp macros; defined in header file `inetsocket.hpp`)
- `flags`: Default 0, can be `SOCK_NONBLOCK` or `SOCK_CLOEXEC` (see: `socket(2)`; on other platforms than Linux
has to be 0 to avoid errors)

*Note: This function does actually more than only connect the socket. Because of some internal requirements (the void constructor, libinetsocket design), this function also *creates* the socket.*

### `shutdown()`
Declared in `streamclient.hpp`, defined in `streamclient.cpp`, inherited from `stream_client_socket`

	void shutdown(int method);

Shuts the socket down (`shutdown(2)`). If you shut it down using the method `LIBSOCKET_WRITE`, the peer receives an `EOF` on his socket and you may not write to the socket anymore. If you shut it down using `LIBSOCKET_READ`, you may not read anymore from the socket.

`method` is `LIBSOCKET_READ`, `LIBSOCKET_WRITE`, or the ORed combination, `LIBSOCKET_READ|LIBSOCKET_WRITE`. `LIBSOCKET_READ` and `LIBSOCKET_WRITE` are defined in `streamclient.hpp`

### Destroy Functions
Declared in `socket.hpp`, defined in `socket.cpp`, inherited from `socket`

	int destroy(void);

Closes the socket and destroys the connection. After a call to `destroy()`, you may connect the socket object again using `connect()`.

Return value 0 if successful, otherwise -1.

### Output/Upload Functions
Inherited from `stream_client_socket` (defined in `streamclient.cpp`)

	ssize_t snd(const void* buf, size_t len, int flags=0);

Conventional send function: Send the content of `buf`, which is `len` bytes long, to
the connected host. `flags` *may* be specified using the values allowed on your platform.
The flags available may be found in `send(2)` (the flags beginning with with `MSG_`)
Returns the number of sent bytes or throws an exception if an error occurred.

	friend inet_stream& operator<<(inet_stream& sock, const char* str);
	friend inet_stream& operator<<(inet_stream& sock, std::string& str);

Now, it gets interesting: The class `inet_stream` imitates the behaviour of
the standard C++ streams (`ostream`, `ofstream` etc.). You may write to the
connected socket using the overloaded bitshift operator. It is overloaded for
C strings (`const char*`, you may also use `char*`) and C++ strings (`std::string`).

As you can see at the return value, you may cascade it (from `examples++/http.c`):

	sock << request1 << request2;

Throws exceptions e.g. if the socket is not connected or `write(2)` returned -1.

### Input/Download Functions
Inherited from `stream_client_socket` (defined in `streamclient.cpp`)

	ssize_t rcv(void* buf, size_t len, int flags=0);

Conventional receive function: Receive `len` bytes from socket and write them to `buf`.
`flags` may be specified and may take the flags specified in `recv(2)` (those beginning with `MSG_`)

	friend inet_stream& operator>>(inet_stream& sock, std::string& dest);

Stream-like read from socket: Reads at most `dest.size()` bytes from socket and puts them to the string. If less than
`dest.size()` characters could be read, the string is resized to the number of read characters so you can check
(`string.empty()`) if the server is done with sending - either closed the socket on his side or shut it down for write access.

### Getters
Declared in `inetbase.hpp`, defined in `inetbase.cpp`

	std::string gethost(void) const;
	std::string getport(void) const;

`gethost()` returns a C++ std::string containing the host to which the socket is connected.

`getport()` returns a C++ std::string containing the port/service to which the socket is connected.

<!-- If you really want to know it, there's also the getter `int getfd() const` which returns the file descriptor -->

## `inet_stream_server` - TCP Internet server
Declared in `inetserverstream.hpp`, defined in `inetserverstream.cpp`

	inet_stream_server(void);
	inet_stream_server(const char* bindhost, const char* bindport, int proto_osi3, int flags=0);
	inet_stream_server(const std::string& bindhost, const std::string& bindport, int proto_osi3, int flags=0);

Create an internet tcp server (passive) socket.

If you use the first constructor, you have to `setup()` the socket before using it. The latter constructors binds the
socket to `bindhost:bindport` using `proto_osi3` (`IPv4` or `IPv6` or `BOTH`).

`flags` are supplied to the internal `socket(2)` call.

### `setup()`

	void setup(const char* bindhost, const char* bindport, int proto_osi3, int flags=0);
	void setup(const std::string& bindhost, const std::string& bindport, int proto_osi3, int flags=0);

If you used the `void`-Constructor, you have to setup the server socket to bind it, set it in listening state etc.
Setup is done with this function (which is quite similar to the constructors). You also may use this function if you
`close(2)`d the socket and want to reuse it.

### `accept()`
Declared in `inetserverstream.hpp`, defined in `inetserverstream.cpp`

	inet_stream* accept(int numeric=0,int accept_flags=0);

Accept an incoming connection. `numeric` may be `NUMERIC` if you want to have the host and port as numbers.
`accept_flags` are passed to `accept4()`.

Returns a pointer to a dynamically allocated `inet_stream` object. Returns NULL if the server socket is marked as
NONBLOCKing and there is no connection to accept.

### Destroy
Declared in `socket.hpp`, defined in `socket.cpp`

	int destroy(void);

Closes the socket and destroys the connection. After a call to `destroy()`, you may re-bind the server socket
object again using `setup()`.

Return value 0 if successful, otherwise -1.

You don't have to destroy the sockets explicitly. The sockets are also destroyed when
the destructor of `socket` (virtual, of course) is called.

### Getters
Declared in `inetbase.hpp`, defined in `inetbase.cpp`

	std::string gethost(void) const;
	std::string getport(void) const;

`gethost()` returns a C++ std::string containing the host to which the socket is bound.

`getport()` returns a C++ std::string containing the port/service to which the socket is bound.

## `inet_dgram_client` Class: Internet UDP Sockets
### Constructors
Declared in `inetclientdgram.hpp`, defined in `inetclientdgram.cpp`

	inet_dgram_client(int proto_osi3, int flags=0); // Flags: socket()
	inet_dgram_client(const char* host, const char* port, int proto_osi3, int flags=0); // Flags: socket()
	inet_dgram_client(const std::string& dsthost, const std::string& dstport, int proto_osi3, int flags=0);

Because the UDP socket can be connected multiple times and send data to various hosts,
it's mandatory to specify the address family at instantiation time. `proto_osi3` may be
`IPv4` or `IPv6` or this information is used to create a socket with `create_inet_dgram_client_socket()` which uses `socket(2)`.

The second form allows to specify a host and a port to which the UDP socket is connected.
If an UDP socket is connected, calls to `snd()` and `rcv()` act like on a stream socket;
in this case the data is sent and received only to/from the host to which the socket is connected.
Here, `proto_osi3` may be `IPv4`, `IPv6` or `BOTH` (in the latter case, `get_address_family()` is used to obtain the address family);

###Setup functions

	void setup(int proto_osi3, int flags=0);
	void setup(const char* dsthost, const char* dstport, int proto_osi3, int flags=0);
	void setup(const string& dsthost, const string& dstport, int proto_osi3, int flags=0);

Work like the constructors and only if the socket has been closed before.

### Connect Functions
Declared in `inetclientdgram.hpp`, defined in `inetclientdgram.cpp`

	void connect(const char* host, const char* port);
	void connect(const std::string& dsthost, const std::string& dstport);

(Re)connects the socket to the specified host/port. If you want to change the address family, you have to create
another socket.

	void deconnect(void);

Cut the connection to the host to which the socket was connected to. Now, stream-like
functions like `snd()` or `rcv()` may not be used anymore.

### Destroy Functions
Declared in `socket.hpp`, defined in `socket.cpp`

	int destroy(void);

0: Success, -1: Error (the only errors at `close()` come if the file descriptor has been closed already). After `close()`, you may call `setup()` to re-set-up the socket instance.

### Send/Upload Functions
Defined in `dgramclient.cpp` (Inherited from `dgram_client_socket`)

	ssize_t snd(const void* buf, size_t len, int flags=0); // flags: send()

Conventional send, *only available if socket is connected*.

Send `len` bytes from `buf` (does not need to be `const`; in C++ an implicit conversion to const is allowed)
to the connected peer. `flags` may be specified and take the flags described in `send(2)` (`MSG_...`).

Defined in `inetdgram.cpp`, inherited from `inet_dgram`

	1: ssize_t sndto(const void* buf, size_t len, const char* host, const char* port, int sndto_flags=0);
	2: ssize_t sndto(const void* buf, size_t len, const std::string& host, const std::string& port, int sndto_flags=0)
	3: ssize_t sndto(const std::string& buf, const std::string& dsthost, const std::string& dstport, int sndto_flags=0);

1, 2: Send `len` bytes from `buf` to `host`:`port`. `sndto_flags` may be specified and take the flags described
in `sendto(2)` (`MSG_...`).
3: Send `buf` to `dsthost:dstport`.

	friend dgram_client_socket& operator<<(dgram_client_socket& sock, const char* str);
	friend dgram_client_socket& operator<<(dgram_client_socket& sock, std::string& str);

Only for connected sockets. Send either a std::string or a (NULL terminated!!!) C string to the connected peer.
Usage like streams:

	sock << "abc" << std::string("def");

### Receive/Download Functions
Defined in `dgramclient.cpp` (inherited from `dgram_client_socket`)

	ssize_t rcv(void* buf, size_t len, int flags=0);

Conventional receive function: Receive `len` bytes from the socket and write them to `buf`. `flags` may take the
flags described in `recv(2)` (`MSG_...`). Only available if socket is connected!

Defined in `inetdgram.cpp`, inherited from `inet_dgram`

	1: ssize_t rcvfrom(void* buf, size_t len, char* host, size_t hostlen, char* port, size_t portlen, int rcvfrom_flags=0, bool numeric=false);
	2: ssize_t rcvfrom(void* buf, size_t len, std::string& srchost, std::string& srcport, int rcvfrom_flags=0, bool numeric=false);
	3: ssize_t rcvfrom(std::string& buf, std::string& srchost, std::string& srcport, int rcvfrom_flags=0, bool numeric=false);

1: Receive `len` bytes from the socket and place them in `buf`. The source host is placed in `host`, which is at least
`hostlen` bytes long, the source port gets written to `port`, which is at least `portlen` bytes long. `recvfrom_flags`
can take the flags described in `recvfrom(2)`, `numeric` is considered as `false`, but if you specify it as
`true`, source host and source port are expressed in numerical form. This is recommended because it's faster
than an additional (internal) rDNS query.

2: Same as form 1, but use strings. The strings are resized to the appropriate length of host and port.

3: Same as form 2, but place the data to `buf`. This method receives at most `buf.size()` bytes.

	friend dgram_client_socket& operator>>(dgram_client_socket& sock, std::string& dest);

Stream-like read from (connected!) socket: Reads at most `dest.size()` bytes from socket and puts them to the string. If less than `dest.size()` characters could be read, the string is resized to
the number of read characters.

### Getters
Declared in `inetbase.hpp`, defined in `inetbase.cpp`, inherited from `inet_socket`

	std::string gethost(void) const;
	std::string getport(void) const;

`gethost()` returns a C++ std::string containing the host to which the socket is connected (if it is connected!)

`getport()` returns a C++ std::string containing the port/service to which the socket is connected (if it is!).

Defined in `dgramclient.cpp`, inherited from `dgram_client_socket`

	bool getconn(void) const;

`getconn()` returns a boolean value which specifies if the socket is connected (true) or not (false).

## `inet_dgram_server` - INET DGRAM server sockets
Declared in `inetserverdgram.hpp`, defined in `inetserverdgram.hpp`.

	inet_dgram_server(const char* host, const char* port, int proto_osi3, int flags=0);
	inet_dgram_server(const std::string& host, const std::string& port, int proto_osi3, int flags=0);

Create and bind a DGRAM socket to `host:port`. The only difference to `inet_dgram_client` is that this socket is
explicitly bound to somewhere and that you may not connect this socket.

* `host` to bind to
* `port` to bind to
* `proto_osi3` - `IPv4 IPv6 BOTH`
* `flags` is passed to `socket(2)`

It is not possible to call `connect(), rcv(), snd()` on such sockets; the `rcvfrom(), sndto()` functions may be called, of course.

### Setup functions
Defined in `inetserverdgram.cpp`

	void setup(const char* host, const char* port, int proto_osi3, int flags=0);
	void setup(const string& host, const string& port, int proto_osi3, int flags=0);

(Re-)Set up the socket (arguments are the same as in the constructors).

### Send/Upload
Defined in `inetdgram.cpp`, inherited from `inet_dgram`

	1: ssize_t sndto(const void* buf, size_t len, const char* host, const char* port, int sndto_flags=0);
	2: ssize_t sndto(const void* buf, size_t len, const std::string& host, const std::string& port, int sndto_flags=0)
	3: ssize_t sndto(const std::string& buf, const std::string& dsthost, const std::string& dstport, int sndto_flags=0);

Send the data in `buf` to `host:port`.

### Receive/Download
Defined in `inetdgram.cpp`, inherited from `inet_dgram`

	1: ssize_t rcvfrom(void* buf, size_t len, char* host, size_t hostlen, char* port, size_t portlen, int rcvfrom_flags=0, bool numeric=false);
	2: ssize_t rcvfrom(void* buf, size_t len, std::string& srchost, std::string& srcport, int rcvfrom_flags=0, bool numeric=false);
	3: ssize_t rcvfrom(std::string& buf, std::string& srchost, std::string& srcport, int rcvfrom_flags=0, bool numeric=false);

1, 2: Receive at most `len` bytes from the socket and place them in `buf`. The source host is placed in `host`, which is
at least `hostlen` bytes long, the source port gets written to `port`, which is at least `portlen` bytes long. `recvfrom_flags`
can take the flags described in `recvfrom(2)`, `numeric` is considered as `false`, but if you specify it as `true`,
source host and source port are expressed in numerical form. This is recommended because it's faster than an additional
(internal) rDNS query.

3: Receive at most `buf.size()` bytes and place them to `buf`. `buf` is resized to the number of received bytes if the
function received less than `buf.size()` bytes.

### Getters
Declared in `inetbase.hpp`, defined in `inetbase.cpp`

	std::string gethost(void) const;
	std::string getport(void) const;

`gethost()` returns a C++ std::string containing the host to which the socket is bound.

`getport()` returns a C++ std::string containing the port/service to which the socket is bound.

### Destroy Functions
Declared in `socket.hpp`, defined in `socket.cpp`

	int destroy(void);

0: Success, -1: Error (the only errors at `close()` occur if the file descriptor has been closed already).
After `destroy()`, it's possible to "re-activate" the socket by calling `setup()`.

# libunixsocket++

libunixsocket++ is the UNIX domain socket part of libsocket++. The class tree is described above and in `classes.svg`.

##`unix_stream_client`
Defined in `unixclientstream.cpp`

	unix_stream_client(void);
	unix_stream_client(const char* path, int socket_flags=0);
	unix_stream_client(const std::string& path, int socket_flags=0);

Create a new unix domain stream client socket. The second and the third form connect the socket immediately to `path`.
If you use the first form, you have to `connect()` your socket before using it. `socket_flags` are flags for the `socket(2)` syscall.

### `connect()`
Defined in `unixclientstream.cpp`

	void connect(const char* path, int socket_flags=0);
	void connect(const std::string& path, int socket_flags=0);

Connect the socket to `path`. `socket_flags` are given to `socket(2)`. You may use this only on unconnected sockets,
i.e. a socket constructed with the non-argument constructor or a socket on which you called before `destroy()`.

### `shutdown()`
Defined in `streamclient.cpp`, inherited from `stream_client_socket`

	void shutdown(int method=LIBSOCKET_WRITE);

Shuts the socket down (`shutdown(2)`). If you shut it down using the method `LIBSOCKET_WRITE`, the peer receives an
`EOF` on his socket and you may not write to the socket anymore. If you shut it down using `LIBSOCKET_READ`, you may
not read anymore from the socket.

Using `LIBSOCKET_READ|LIBSOCKET_WRITE` (bitwise OR) shuts the socket completely down.

### `snd() rcv()`
Defined in `streamclient.cpp`, inherited from `stream_client_socket`

	1: ssize_t snd(const void* buf, size_t buflen, int send_flags=0);
	2: ssize_t rcv(void* buf, size_t len, int recv_flags=0);

1: Send the data in `buf` which is `buflen` bytes to the connected peer. `send_flags` is passed to `send(2)`.
2: Receive `buflen` bytes from the connected peer and store them in buf. `recv_flags` is passed to `recv(2)`.

### Stream operators
Defined in `streamclient.cpp`, inherited from `stream_client_socket`

	friend stream_client_socket& operator<<(stream_client_socket& sock, const char* str);
	friend stream_client_socket& operator<<(stream_client_socket& sock, std::string& str);

	friend stream_client_socket& operator>>(stream_client_socket& sock, std::string& dest);

Like the normal file stream operators. `unix_stream_client` is a child of `stream_client_socket´.

Output ("upload") works for strings and legacy C strings, input ("download") only for C++ strings.
The download function reads at most `dest.size()` bytes from the socket. If it reads less,
the string is resized to the new length, 0 if the peer shut its socket down or closed the connection.

*SO RESIZE YOUR STRINGS BEFORE DOWNLOADING DATA!*

### Getters
Defined in `unixbase.cpp`, inherited from `unix_socket`

	string get_path(void);

Get the peer socket path (to which the socket is connected).

### Destroy

	int destroy(void);

Call `close()` on the underlying file descriptor. If you call now `connect()` on the socket, you may exchange data again.

##`unix_stream_server`
Defined in `unixserverstream.cpp`

	unix_stream_server(void);
	unix_stream_server(const char* path, int flags=0);
	unix_stream_server(const std::string& path, int flags=0);

Create a unix domain SOCK_STREAM server socket which is bound to `path`. `flags` are passed to `socket(2)`.
If you use the `void` constructor, you have to `setup()` your socket before using it.

###`setup()`
Defined in `unixserverstream.cpp`

	void setup(const char* path, int flags=0);

If the socket was not set up with a constructor, you have to call this function before using the new socket.
The server socket is bound to `path`, and `flags` are passed to `socket(2)`.

###`accept()`
Defined in `unixserverstream.cpp`

	unix_stream_client* accept(int flags=0);

Accept a new connection on the socket. `flags` are passed to `accept4(2)`. Returns a pointer to a dynamically allocated
`unix_stream_client` object. It's recommended, especially for long-running applications, to call `delete` on this pointer
when it isn't needed anymore.

### Getters
Defined in `unixbase.cpp`, inherited from `unix_socket`

	string get_path(void);

Get the socket path (to which the socket is bound).

### Destroy

	int destroy(void);

Call `close()` on the underlying file descriptor. You may work with the socket again after calling `setup()`.

##`unix_dgram_client`
Defined in `unixclientdgram.cpp`

	unix_dgram_client(int flags=0);
	unix_dgram_client(const char* path, int flags=0);
	unix_dgram_client(const std::string& path, int flags=0);

Create a UNIX DGRAM socket. If you use the second or third constructor, bind it additionally to path.

###Setup
Defined in `unixclientdgram.cpp`

	void setup(const char* path, int flags=0);

Sets up the socket like the constructor, but only if it is not set up yet.

###`connect()`, `deconnect()`
Defined in `unixclientdgram.cpp`

	void connect(const char* path);
	void connect(const std::string& path);

Connect the DGRAM socket to the specified path. You may call `snd()` or `rcv()` on a UNIX DGRAM socket if it's connected.

	void deconnect(void);

Disconnect the DGRAM socket. (Connect it to NULL).

###I/O
Inherited from `dgram_client_socket` (`dgramclient.cpp`)

	friend dgram_client_socket& operator<<(dgram_client_socket& sock, const char* str);
	friend dgram_client_socket& operator<<(dgram_client_socket& sock, std::string& str);
	friend dgram_client_socket& operator>>(dgram_client_socket& sock, std::string& dest);

	ssize_t snd(const void* buf, size_t len, int flags=0); // flags: send()
	ssize_t rcv(void* buf, size_t len, int flags=0);

Inherited from `unix_dgram` (`unixdgram.cpp`)

	ssize_t sndto(const void* buf, size_t length, const char* path, int sendto_flags=0);
	ssize_t sndto(const void* buf, size_t length, const std::string& path, int sendto_flags=0);
	ssize_t sndto(const std::string& buf, const std::string& path, int sendto_flags=0);

	ssize_t rcvfrom(void* buf, size_t length, char* source, size_t source_len, int recvfrom_flags=0);
	ssize_t rcvfrom(void* buf, size_t length, std::string& source, int recvfrom_flags=0);
	ssize_t rcvfrom(std::string& buf, std::string& source, int recvfrom_flags=0);

### Getters
Defined in `unixbase.cpp`, inherited from `unix_socket`

	string get_path(void);

Get the peer socket path (to which the socket is connected, if it's connected).
If the socket is not connected, an empty string is returned.

Defined in `dgramclient.cpp`, inherited from `dgram_client_socket`

	bool getconn(void)

`getconn()` returns a boolean value which specifies if the socket is connected (true) or not (false).

### Destroy

	int destroy(void);

Call `close()` on the underlying file descriptor. You may work with the socket again after calling `setup()`.

##`unix_dgram_server`
Defined in `unixserverdgram.cpp`

	unix_dgram_server(void);
	unix_dgram_server(const char* bindpath, int socket_flags=0);
	unix_dgram_server(const std::string& bindpath, int socket_flags=0);

`unix_dgram_server` is quite similar to `unix_dgram_client`, especially if bound. The important difference is that
you may not call `connect()` on `unix_dgram_server`.

###Setup
Defined in `unixserverdgram.cpp`

	void setup(const char* bindpath, int socket_flags=0);
	void setup(const string& bindpath, int socket_flags=0);

Works like the constructors, but only if the socket is not set up yet.

###I/O
Defined in `unixdgram.cpp`

	ssize_t sndto(const void* buf, size_t length, const char* path, int sendto_flags=0);
	ssize_t sndto(const void* buf, size_t length, const std::string& path, int sendto_flags=0);
	ssize_t sndto(const string& buf, const string& path, int sendto_flags=0);

	ssize_t rcvfrom(void* buf, size_t length, char* source, size_t source_len, int recvfrom_flags=0);
	ssize_t rcvfrom(void* buf, size_t length, std::string& source, int recvfrom_flags=0);
	ssize_t rcvfrom(string& buf, string& source, int recvfrom_flags=0);

### Getters
Defined in `unixbase.cpp`, inherited from `unix_socket`

	string get_path(void);

Get the socket path (to which the socket is bound).

### Destroy

	int destroy(void);

Call `close()` on the underlying file descriptor. You may work with the socket again after calling `setup()`.

# Other Classes

## `dgram_over_stream` class

`dgram_over_stream` enables you to send discrete packets of data over a reliable stream socket.
This is achieved by prefixing every packet with its length, so the other side knows how many bytes
to expect.

The API is quite simple; the constructor takes any socket implementing stream semantics:

        dgram_over_stream(const stream_client_socket& inner);

It then adds a datagram-oriented API on top of that:

        ssize_t sndmsg(const void* buf, size_t len);
        ssize_t rcvmsg(void* buf, size_t len);

`sndmsg()` sends `len` bytes from `buf` on the socket. If the receiver is using a `dgram_over_stream` socket as well,
it will receive only the entire message upon calling `rcvmsg()`. If `len` in `rcvmsg()` is smaller than the incoming
frame, then the surplus will be discarded silently.

There are two caveats to using this wrapper; 1) Do not use sockets that are in non-blocking mode. The internal state machine
assumes that the socket is blocking. 2) Do not use the `dgram_over_stream` beyond the scope of the socket you used for constructing
it; because every socket's destructor will close it, this would lead to `dgram_over_stream` containing a dangling file descriptor.

## `selectset` class

        selectset(void)

The `selectset` class makes the use of multiple sockets at once easy. It is implemented as template class, this means you
have to specify a socket class as parameter. This is fine as long as you just select between multiple sockets of one type; however,
if you want to use select on different socket types, you have to specify any shared superclass of the sockets, that is in most cases
`socket`.

        template<typename SocketT>
        void add_fd(const SocketT& sock, int method);

First, add just any socket class derived from `socket` to the new set. Do this multiple times if you have more
than one socket (which is likely). `method` is either `LIBSOCKET_READ` or `LIBSOCKET_WRITE`, so if you want
to be notified if some socket is ready to be read from it, specify `LIBSOCKET_READ`. `LIBSOCKET_READ` must also be
specified for server sockets.

        template<typename SocketT>
	std::pair<std::vector<SocketT*>, std::vector<SocketT*> > wait(long long microsecs=0);

Then call `wait()`. The argument is a timeout in microseconds after that the function returns, defaulting to 0 (infinite).

The return type is a `std::pair` consisting of two vectors of socket pointers. Don't panic, there's a typedef in `select.hpp`:

	namespace libsocket {
            class selectset {
		typedef std::pair<
				    std::vector<libsocket::socket*>, // Sockets ready for reading
				    std::vector<libsocket::socket*>  // Sockets ready for writing.
				 > ready_socks;
            }
	}

If a socket is ready for both reading and writing, it may be a member of both vectors vector.

A typical program snippet using this class could look like this example:

	inet_stream sock1("spheniscida.de","80",IPv6);
	inet_stream sock2("spheniscida.de","25",IPv6);

	selectset<inet_stream> socks;
	socks.add_fd(sock1,LIBSOCKET_WRITE);
	socks.add_fd(sock2,LIBSOCKET_READ);

	selectset<inet_stream>::ready_socks rs = socks.wait();

        // In case both sockets became available.

	inet_stream* ready_http_sock = rs.second[0];
	inet_stream* ready_smtp_sock = rs.first[0];

	// Do something with the sockets...


